
Over the last 10 years, qualitative methods of investigation (e.g., grounded theory, phenomenology, archaeology) have become increasingly common for research in statistics education. However, we have yet to see researchers integrate these methodologies for research on the teaching and learning of data science. In this presentation I share two avenues of research in data science education which I believe are ripe for investigation with qualitative methods. 

First, I outline a qualitative methodology for analyzing the code students produce in their process of learning. Drawing on the Block Model (Schulte, 2008) to frame my analysis, I explore the R code produced by one graduate student throughout their research, describing their computing skills, organizing these descriptions into themes, and comparing emergent themes across time. 

Next, I describe how qualitative methods can illuminate peer interactions in the classroom. Group work is one method of supporting students’ engagement and sense of belonging in undergraduate classrooms, which may be especially important for students with marginalized identities seeking community and belonging. However, group collaborations can also be subject to inequitable interactions, contribute to disparities of power and status, and squelch some students’ opportunities to learn and develop discipline-based identities. I explore interactions between two mathematics students to motivate the importance of research investigating pair-programming environments in data science classrooms. 

Finally, I conclude with some parting remarks on what I have learned about oral exams through my research on power and authority in the classroom. 